The curfew tolls the knell of parting day, 
         The lowing herd wind slowly o'er the lea, 
The plowman homeward plods his weary way, 
         And leaves the world to darkness and to me. 

Now fades the glimm'ring landscape on the sight, 
         And all the air a solemn stillness holds, 
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight, 
         And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds; 

Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tow'r 
         The moping owl does to the moon complain 
Of such, as wand'ring near her secret bow'r, 
         Molest her ancient solitary reign. 

Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade, 
         Where heaves the turf in many a mould'ring heap, 
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid, 
         The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep. 

The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn, 
         The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed, 
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn, 
         No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed. 

For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn, 
         Or busy housewife ply her evening care: 
No children run to lisp their sire's return, 
         Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share. 

Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield, 
         Their furrow oft the stubborn glebe has broke; 
How jocund did they drive their team afield! 
         How bow'd the woods beneath their sturdy stroke! 

Let not Ambition mock their useful toil, 
         Their homely joys, and destiny obscure; 
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile 
         The short and simple annals of the poor. 

The boast of heraldry, the pomp of pow'r, 
         And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave, 
Awaits alike th' inevitable hour. 
         The paths of glory lead but to the grave. 

Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault, 
         If Mem'ry o'er their tomb no trophies raise, 
Where thro' the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault 
         The pealing anthem swells the note of praise. 

Can storied urn or animated bust 
         Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath? 
Can Honour's voice provoke the silent dust, 
         Or Flatt'ry soothe the dull cold ear of Death? 

Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid 
         Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire; 
Hands, that the rod of empire might have sway'd, 
         Or wak'd to ecstasy the living lyre. 

But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page 
         Rich with the spoils of time did ne'er unroll; 
Chill Penury repress'd their noble rage, 
         And froze the genial current of the soul. 

Full many a gem of purest ray serene, 
         The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear: 
Full many a flow'r is born to blush unseen, 
         And waste its sweetness on the desert air. 

Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast 
         The little tyrant of his fields withstood; 
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest, 
         Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood. 